PALA TWO: FIRST DAY-NIGHT TIME 
[Prayer to the Goddess]

Leave Kailasa Mountain behind, come and stay in the abode of mortals and save your servant. Rest for eight days—listen to the songs and see the drama. Come and reside at this function. Although I have authored and studied many texts, I do not travel on the path of the learned. You have blessed me with this heavy responsibility. I have no experience with either rhythm or meter, so how can I teach it to others? Whatever faults and qualities I may have in this endeavor is your responsibility. Whatever you want me to say, I will say it. You are the poet—instruct me. Teach me how you want the verse to be arranged and thus remove my obstacles. You are worshipped all over the world through animal sacrifice, fire, incense, and lamps. All the inhabitants of the universe are your servants. The nayaka1has faults, but please do not be angry. Bestow your merciful glance on me. You are Rama (Vishnu’s consort), and Vani (Sarasvati, goddess of speech), Yoganidra (the divine sleep of Vishnu), and Narayani (Laksmi, goddess of fortune who serves Vishnu), the three types of knowledge (three Vedas), and
inexhaustible desire. You are the mahayoga (divine union), the night of destruction at the end of the world, the gayatri hymn, the sustainer of the Universe, the capacity for action, and the cause of earthly attachments.
When the earth became immersed in water and Narayana reclined upon the serpent, at that time of rest, two demons gained prodigious strength at the base of Narayan's ear. When they saw the lord of creation Brahma sitting on the lotus
growing out of Narayana’s navel, they, being in a furious mood, went to kill Brahma out of anger. Brahma obtained relief at your feet by serving you. Now you are proclaimed as Vipadanasini (destroyer of calamity). You are faith and satisfaction; you are forgiveness and nourishment. Oh daughter of the mountains, wife of Isana (Siva)! You are the Agama, Nigama, and Tantra, the great seed mantra [hrim] the mother of the Veda, and of the whole universe. In Gokula (Vrndavana) you are known by the name Gomati, in Tamuloka [Tamluk, Midnapur, in present-day West Bengal] you are Vargabhima. In the north you are known as the body of the universe; in Hastinapura you are Jayanti; in Nanda’s home you are Vijaya. In the presence of Hari you are Mahamaya. Because of the pride of the Danava clan the eighth child of Daivaki (Krshna) was born for the destruction of the earth’s burden. In order to remove the earth’s fear, you, in the form of Yoganidra Bhagavati, took up residence in the womb of Yas'oda. Deeply fearing the king of Bhoja Kamsa, Vasudeva took Sri Hari into his arms and went to the dwelling of Nanda. Entering the waters of the Yamuna, you created a path through the river and crossed it in the form of a jackal. In order to take away the great weight off the earth, Narayana appeared (as Krshna) as a merciful avatara in the Yadu family. You were born from Yasoda’s womb and became the daughter of Nanda. Sri Kavikankana wrote this.

[8]
The primary god Niranjana whose creation is the three worlds, that primordial man (or supreme male principle), ancient one who resides in the void, that magnanimous one, thought about how he would execute the task of creation. He had no one to assist him. There were no demons, gods, men, nor siddhas, nagas, caranas, or kinnaras. There was no day or night, no rising of the sun or moon, only darkness all of the time. He [Niranjana] is radiant like millions of suns and wears a yellow garment. His unparalleled body is the color of a dark cloud. He is adorned with a golden girdle and garland and drives away the darkness with his crown and jeweled necklace. Rays from the kaustubha gem illuminate his throat and his nails are as bright and beautiful as millions of moons. Earrings frame both of his cheeks. His radiance is like new rain clouds and his teeth rival the moon. His arms extend to his knees. His power is inconceivable and infinite. He thought: there is no place to rest on either water or land. There is no consistency in talk. Gosai thought himself to be like one powerless. Thinking anxiously about all the work to be done with full concentration, the king of gods created matter [prakrti—the female principle] from his body. The poet Sri Mukunda, having written this pamcali of amazing construction in a three-footed meter, sings this song.

[9]
The primordial god’s eternal energy, that form which enchants the world, manifested the female cause of creation. That soft-spoken one named Narayani stood before him with a vessel in her hand. Her ankle bells made a sound that rivaled a swan’s call. Her ten fingernails and toenails reflected the moonlight. Her hands, dyed red, steal the pride of the red lotus and her fingers resembled buds of the michelia flower. Her thighs rival rama bananas, and her hips were large and heavy. Her waist rivals that of
a lion’s. Sweet bells tinkle and she is dressed in a silk garment. Her garb is indescribable and her beauty surpasses that of a swan. Her bodily radiance defeats that of gold and her attractive breasts are like the globular appendage on an elephant’s forehead. Excellent garlands of gems and pearls shine on her bosom in the same way that the Ganga adorns the summit of Sumeru Mountain. Oh, how motionless lightning floats in the guise of a jeweled necklace as it decorates her throat! Her manifestation is without comparison.
She sweetly smiles ever so slightly. Her posture is like that of a young peacock. Her ringlets are decorated with flowers, her forehead marked with a spot of vermilion that looks like the sun at dawn. Her lips shine like the red jujube fruit and her teeth are like a row of pearls. Her beauty burns away the darkness.
Her forehead is decorated with a spot of vermilion along with beads of sweat and a mark of sandalwood paste. A great mass of darkness in the guise of hair is holding the sun and moon hostage. Her nose rivals a sesame flower and her speech outdoes the
sound of the vallaki. Her eyebrows are the siblings of the bow. Her eyes put the restlessness of the wagtail bird to shame. Her face is a full moon. The hair on her head is like a black yak tail. She wears conch shell bracelets and armlets and is without comparison in this world. She wears a jeweled crown. When she laughs, it’s as if lightning is playing—jeweled ornaments hang on her forehead and her face enchants the world. When she receives a sign from her lord, that primordial goddess Mahamaya desired to create the world. Desiring the feet of Uma in his heart, Cakravarti Sri Kavikankana wrote this new song.

[10]
The one god, that magnanimous one, became manifest in many forms in the same way that gold earrings and a piece of gold are essentially the same thing. The lord impregnated prakrti [matter, female principle] with his power and a great son took shape. The great one’s son was born, his name was Ahamkara (the ego) and from that all of creation was made. From Ahamkara was born five beings: earth, water, fire, sky and wind. People call these five the pancabhuta—from them came all living beings. One body divided into qualities became three. From the quality of passion (rajasa) came the Grandfather (Brahma) who rides a swan. From goodness (sattva) comes Vishnu who sustains everything. From ignorance (tamasa) comes Mahadeva who is the cause of destruction. The sons of Brahma emanating from his mind became four: Sanatakumara, Sanaka, and Sanatana. Sananda completes their ranks. They have nothing on their minds besides the stories of Krshna. They did not listen to their father nor were they inclined to marry because they had realized happiness from devotion to Hari.
The phenomenal world, Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva are all real. The four Kumara brothers carefully sing the names of Hari. When the four sons of Brahma rejected his command to marry, great anger welled up in Vidhata’s (the god of fate, in this case Brahma) heart. In anger Vidhata frowned and from between his eyebrows was born a purple colored youth. That Mahadeva cried like a baby [and said] “give me my name, abode, and wife, and make me your own.” After some deliberation, Prajapati gave him the names Rudra [anger], Mrtunjaya [conqueror of death], Mahesa [great master],
Isana [Siva as the sun and protector of the northeast direction], and Pasupati [lord of animals]. Brahma said: “In your heart I give you power over the senses, wind, fire, water, Indra [god of rain], the moon, sun, and earth. Also, I give you the powers of perseverance, intelligence, supremacy, control over others, auspiciousness, and invisibility [or the ability to make oneself small]. These six women [sakti—power personified] will worship you equally. Create my son, and so may your lifespan increase! Your four older brothers have disobeyed my order.” By his father’s command Siva became inclined towards austerity. He created the pramathas,the pretas, bhutas, and danas. Seeing his son decorated with matted hair, a bone necklace, and smeared with ashes, Vidhata stopped him from creating anything else. “Son, stop generating such fear-inducing dangerous beings! Instead perform austerities and worship Narayana.”
So then Mahadeva worshipped Narayana with full concentration. Subsequently ten sons were born from Brahma. They were all possessed of good behavior, humility, knowledge, as well as beauty and other good qualities. Their names are: Marici, Angira, Atri, Bhrgu, Daksha, Kratu, Paulaha, and Paulasta. These eight are the cause of the world’s creation. Vasishta became a god-sage of immense power [heat] and Narada, from whom Hari’s mercy emanates, was born. Brahma split his body into two parts. From the left side a woman was created and from the right, a man. A woman named Satarupa obtained a bodily form. The man was the Manu by the name of Svayambhuva. Brahma said to Manu: “Listen to my words. Create progeny and relieve me of my pain. Gosai [lord of the earth, Brahma] did well to give the order to multiply but there was no place for the progeny to sit. Throughout the ages the earth existed as a residence for the progeny. The asuras [eternal rivals of the gods] seized the earth and brought it down to the waters of the underworld. When Brahma heard this, he became worried. At that juncture Varaha was suddenly born from his nostril. Let one’s heart be
immersed at the feet of Abhaya. Sri Kavikankana sings this sweet song.

[11]
By inconceivable and inexhaustible illusion, Vishnu took the form of a boar. His body is decorated with an effulgent sacred thread. Holding a bow and a great bamboo staff, he entered the ocean of universal dissolution and arrived at Patala [the watery underworld]. That Bhagavan is kind to his servants. He took up the earth in his tusks and killed the great hero Hiranyaksha. His teeth are white like the kunda [variety of white jasmine] flower and there the dark green goddess Vasumati [earth] looked beautiful. She appeared like a lotus flower with its leaves perched on the tusks of an elephant. Brahma, the perfected beings, and the sages offered hymns in praise. The lord of the universe set the earth on the waters, and shook off his body repeatedly. The drops of water from his boar bristles flew up and then fell to the earth. These drops are actually great ascetics. The king of the gods left the water and forcefully shook himself off. Six of his hairs fell from his body. They fell to the earth’s womb where they became six blades of grass. This grass, also known as kusa, dispels obstacles. 

The master of all mountains established Meru in the midst of other peaks such as Mandara, Gandhamadana, Malyavana, Nila, Sveta, Srngavana, Hema, Himakuta, and Himalaya. First came Uditagiri [where the sun rises] and then Astasikhari [where the sun sets] and in four directions lay the horizon. The golden mountain lies to the outside. When he saw the lord of Yogesvara [the lord of Siva, Varaha], Vidhata’s sorrow was relieved. In the upper reaches of Sumeru Mountain are the chariots of the sun and the moon. The sun moves around in a circle. Its going and coming mark the days, nights, months, lunar fortnights, and the seasons path during a year’s time. That avatara who is full of compassion became the porpoise constellation whose tail is raised and head lowered. There among the swirling stars the lord eternally wanders wherever there are stars and constellations. In the upper reaches of the universe, the Ganga flows with mighty and restless waves. On the summit of Meru, it splits into four streams: Slta, Bhadra, Bankhu, and that abode of unlimited virtue, the Alakananda [Alakanandini], which is best among pilgrimage sites. On Brhaspati [Jupiter], that jewel among kings Manu resides along with his consort Satarupa. Having composed this in tripadi meter, I Mukunda have produced this pamcali, king among mangala poems.

[12]
Satarupa frolicked with Manu delightedly. In time, two virtuous sons were born to them. The older son Priyavrata became a great king, the imprint of whose chariot wheel became the seven seas. The younger, Utthanapada was renowned in the three worlds. His son Dhruva is well known in the Puranas. Dhruva had three daughters who were all endowed with beauty and good attributes. They were Akuti, Prasuti, and Devahuti. Akuti was given in marriage to the sage Ruci. Prajapati gave him a dowry of a chariot, a horse and elephant. Kardama Muni was given Devahuti along with much wealth. Daksha Muni took Prasuti in marriage. She gave birth to sixteen beautiful daughters. Of the sixteen, the most celebrated was their daughter Sati from whom righteousness and freedom from illusion come naturally. On the advice of Narada, Daksha Prajapati gave his daughter Sati to Mahadeva [Siva] in marriage. He gave a large dowry, thereby fulfilling the wishes of everyone. And then he sent the bride and groom off to Kailasa. Soon after, Brahma’s son Bhrgu brought the guru of the gods, Brhaspati, and began a sacrifice whose officiating priest became the sage of the four Vedas, Angira. Brahma himself became a participant. Bhrgumuni invited all the gods and Narada personally went from house to house with the news. Cakrapani [Vishnu] came riding on Garuda; Candracuda [Siva] arrived on the back of a bull. The fourteen yamas [gods of death] came riding on buffaloes and the forty-nine pavanas [winds] came on the backs of deer. The planets appeared riding on
the backs of zodiac creatures. The dikapalas [guardians of the directions] went on chariots. Some went by chariot, some by elephant, some went on horses and some flew on airplanes to the abode of Bhrgu. In fact, Lakshmi, Sarasvati, and all of the goddesses flew in to Bhrgu’s place by air. The sage offered a footbath and mouthwash to the guests as they were seated. Then they were offered a sweet drink made from honey, sugar, yogurt and ghee [madhuparka] as well as other amenities.
Some of the guests made philosophical arguments, others countered with
refutations. At this moment, Daksha arrived. When the gods saw Daksha, they all stood.
Everyone except for Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva bowed to him. Seeing the unseemly
behavior of Siva, Daksha shook with anger. May your own heart be immersed at the feet
of Abhaya; Sri Kavikankana sings this sweet song. 

[13]
“Listen people of the assembly! This is a matter of great sorrow. This Siva is my son-in-law. We came to this place of sacrifice and he did not respect me. He did not bow his head to me in humility. And what can I say to Narada? On his word I gave my daughter in marriage to such a depraved consumer of bhanga [cannabis]. I gave my daughter, a most virtuous girl within these three worlds, to an unworthy groom. Her body has dried up from the heat of her remorse! I have no idea from where Siva originated. What is his pedigree or lineage? I have no idea who his mother and father are. I am contemptible and lack intelligence—I have thrown my daughter into the fire. I hang my head in shame in this assembly. Siva’s cosmetics are the ashes from a funeral
pyre; on his shoulder hangs a bag of bhanga. His upper garment is a poisonous snake. Who named such an abode of ill luck Siva (means auspicious) and who considers him to be a god? While desiring good, I have blackened my family line. Fate has gone left on me. His decoration is a garland of bones; his playground is a cremation ground. My son-in-law is this sort of fellow! He lives with a bunch of yakshas, danas, pretas, and bhutas and sees fit to eat and sleep with them all. He has no established caste, yet he is my daughter’s husband. The gods are always gossiping about this. My girl Sati is an ocean of good qualities, but fate has cheated her. Her husband is naked and poor. Our clan has become blemished and my heart is dissatisfied. This scandal is being spread everywhere. A father-in-law is the same as one’s father, but he did not join hands in salute to me and thereby insulted me in the assembly. He has no affection for people. He ruins the sacrificial offering and does not pay attention to the path of the Veda.
The son of Gunaraja Misra who is engaged in the art of song has consulted many of the Puranas. This native of Daminya town is desirous of music. Sri Kavikankana sings this song full of rasa [richness and flavor].

[14]
When Nandi heard Daksha’s speech, his body shook and his eyes turned red like rubies. Nandi then took up water in his hand to curse Daksha: “Daksha! You do not have the inclination to tread the path of liberation. Why do you speak disparagingly of Mahadeva [Siva]? May your head immediately become that of a goat!”
Becoming morose, Siva left for Kailasa and Daksha returned to his own abode. The two became inimical to each other. Both father and son-in-law became like snake and mongoose. The disagreement between the two lasted for a long time and the anger in Daksha’s heart grew to huge proportions.
After a while Brahma honored Daksha by making him the leader among all of
his sons. Brahma made Daksha the king of the brahmanas and presented him with the royal umbrella. He also blessed him with a holy thread made of gold. Vidhi [Brahma] encouraged Daksha to support and protect the brahmanas. It was from that time that the Paladhi clan became priests. By the grace of Brahma, Daksha became very proud. He brought Brhaspati and began another sacrifice. Daksha invited the gods, nagas, and humans. Narada went to everyone’s homes to invite them. All the gods except for Brahma and Vishnu arrived. The nagas and sages arrived at Daksha’s home. When she heard the noise in the sky made by all the flying vehicles, Daksha’s daughter Candi [Sati] became restless. Hearing about her father’s fire sacrifice from other people, she submitted the following to Sankara with folded hands: “Daksha Prajapati Gosai is your father-in-law. Many people from all over the three worlds have gone to his place. If you give me permission, I will go to my father’s house. Since hearing about my father’s festival, I have a great desire to go.”
Having said this, Sati took hold of Siva’s feet—tears poured from her eyes and her speech became choked with emotion.
Siva said: “You will go without an invitation—this is disgraceful! When my name is mentioned, you will hear a lot of criticism.”
Sati replied: “There is no fault in going to one’s own father’s home without an invitation. Everything else you hear is just gossip.”
May our hearts be immersed at the feet of the fearless one, Abhaya. This verse is written about Gauri.

[15]
Give me permission and I will go to my father’s place to see the sacrificial feast. All who reside in the three worlds have gone there. How can a daughter survive [without also going]? I desire this and hold on to your feet. Be gracious, oh ocean of mercy! I will go for five days. I have wanted to visit my father for a long time, but have not mentioned it out of fear. We tied the knot and I came to your home, now seven years have passed. Put this argument behind us; let bygones be bygones and fulfill my wish. I will eat my mother’s cooking. Sitting here in this mountain forest I have no friends and neighbors nearby. Here in this frontier I have no girlfriends to apply vermilion to my forehead. I will go there for only a little while—there is no place here for me to relax. Fate has made me unhappy from the time of my birth. My father is virtuous; he will give us many gifts. He will treat his daughters generously when bestowing ornaments and I will be honored first. My father does not play favorites.”
When Sulapani [one who holds a trident in hand, Siva] heard the speech of Sati, he said: “Listen to me dear. When you go to your father’s house, it will not turn out well. There will be much harassment to come.”
The great Misra Jagannatha is the father of Hrdaya Misra. His son Kavicandra delights his father’s heart. His younger brother Sri Kavikankana wrote this when ordered by Candika.

[16]
Pasupati did not give permission to go, and so the daughter of Daksha became angry. Going against the wishes of everyone, Bhima [Sati] frowned and left alone for her father’s house with her clothes in disarray and her hair hanging loose like a madwoman. Candi left without listening to the words of Siva. After receiving a signal from Siva, Nandi quickly followed close behind. That best of bulls made all the travel arrangements. A maidservant ran behind carrying ear ornaments and a container of vermilion. Someone took along a comb and mirror. Someone filled a container with fragrant water and brought it along. Someone else held a white umbrella over her head. All of the army came with pretas, bhutas, and danas, as well as two generals named Neka and Joka. The danas, their bodies smeared with red dust, marched in front and behind. When Sati saw this, she became happy. Nandi brought over a bull; Sati mounted it and set off. Nandi also had an umbrella held over her head. I have no idea how far she traveled, but she covered a three-day journey in only six hours.
She arrived in her father’s village and when Prasuti heard Sati’s name, she quickly ran over to her. Taking Sati up into her arms, Prasuti was ecstatic. Devi paid respects to her mother. Prasuti brought her daughter to her own room and presented her with a footbath, mouthwash and a golden seat. All of Sati’s sisters embraced her and inquired about news from her home. Then all of her friends came when they heard of Candi’s arrival. Writing in a tripadi meter, Cakravarti Sri Kavikankana composes this pamcali.

[17]

After conversing with her mother and sisters, Candi swiftly left for the sacrificial arena. Candi bowed at the feet of Daksha. With lowered face Prajapati blessed his daughter: “May you spend your time as a married woman. Let any adversity be resolved. May you have a long life and may your husband be calm and well disposed. When Devi did not see Siva being worshipped at the sacrifice, she spoke to her father, her body shaking with anger: “Listen father, your daughter Sati is hurt and offended, and has distracted you. You have invited Dharma [Yama] and all of your friends to the sacrifice. You presented all of your sons-in-law with clothes and ornaments. However, your dealings with Siva are not proper. I have become your daughter because of bad luck. You have not performed virtuous works; what else can I say? After hearing this from Sati, Daksha angrily said these words for all to hear.
At the feet of the fearless one, Abhaya, may our hearts be immersed in this sweet song of Sri Kavikankana.

[18]
“If I speak frankly you will feel pain in your heart afterwards because of what is been written on your forehead [prescribed by fate]. Because of your previous acts, your husband has gone down the left path. Why would I ever bring him to this sacrifice? Siva’s garment is a tiger skin. He wears a necklace of bone and he is covered in crematory ash. Who respects one whose home is in the cremation ground? Preta beings and ghosts follow him; he rides on a great bull holding a horn and dambura drum. He eats the fruit of the dhutura plant. He has much affection for snakes and the cobra is
his upper garment. He wears a snake necklace and snakes for earrings. It is because of the fruits of your actions that your husband is insane. He is poverty-stricken and does not care for wealth. It is improper of him to keep his long hair so unkempt and matted. People laugh when they see him. Young lady, by serving that lord of the animals you have attained the lot of an animal. You lie alongside snakes! The crescent moon on Siva’s head and the snakes he mixes with are both bereft in this world. The rakshas, danas, pretas and bhutas all live with him. They all sleep and eat together! This lord of the directions [Siva in the form of Isana is one] has no determined caste and the gods constantly gossip about him. I am the [grand]son of Brahma and am worshipped throughout the three worlds. Listen to how Siva has behaved with me: At Bhrgu’s sacrificial arena he failed to pay his respects to me in front of the gods and sages. Listen to what I have to say my daughter. If I bring him here to this sacrifice, it will definitely be ruined. When the sages see Siva’s behavior all of the sages will not stay in the same place as him.”
Hearing this talk of Daksha’s, the mother of the world angrily gave her reply.
Writing in a tripadti meter and compiling it in pamcali form, Mukunda the foremost of poets sang.

[19]
Sati replied: “When the ocean was churned and dark poison came up, the three worlds burned as if the fire of dissolution had arrived. It was this poison that Siva drank and saved the universe. Only fools don’t understand his greatness and worth. I will
retaliate after hearing such insults to Siva. Because of your pride I will not keep this
body anymore. It is Siva whose bow is called pinaka, whose bowstring is the serpent Ananta, and whose arrow Vishnu personally becomes. Hara [Siva] burned that enemy of the world Tripura. Why would you say such ridiculous things about such a person? Aja [Brahma] considers the flowers used to worship his feet and the very dust of his feet to be rare and desirable. Gods, men, and nagas worship Siva. Besides you, no one finds fault with him. When one hears superiors maligned it is proper to cover one’s ears and punish the offender. One should leave that place and go somewhere else. To remedy this insult from my father I will renounce my life breath.
Sati meditated on the feet of Siva in the lotus of her heart. With great resolve, the great goddess dressed in a new garment. By the power of yoga the mother of the universe left her body behind. Mukunda wrote this Gaurimangala narration.

[20]
The gods, demons, men, everyone was aghast. Someone said that Daksha’s sacrifice had become a horrible disaster. All of Sati's friends and family began to scream and shout when her body went up in flames because of her yogic powers. When Sati gave up her life at the sacrificial grounds, the danas rushed in to destroy the sacrifice. Nandi ran ahead while Neka and Joka dashed in two directions. Hundreds of danas advanced; there were too many of them to count. Bhrgu made an oblation into the fire in order to destroy the enemy. Many great warriors rose out of the fire along with chariots, horses, soldiers, and elephants. The danas were injured by all of the swords and spears. Those danas attacked, and then they retreated during that battle. Nandi mounted a bull and left the fight.16 All of Siva’s servants became dismayed. They all fled and then
re-grouped in Kailasa. Nandi told the news to Mahesvara [Siva] with a thousand mouths.

He fell to the earth and cried. Siva ripped out a clump of his matted hair and dashed it to
the ground. Virabhadra appeared at that exact spot along with Viraghata. That warrior’s three eyes were equal to three suns and the helmet on his head bumped against the sky. He stood with folded hands before Siva. Fire and sparks shot out of his eyes. After bowing in respect, the demon submitted this: “Oh Lord, please tell me what you would like me to do.” Siva commanded him to go and destroy the sacrifice and gave special orders to kill Daksha. Virabhadra got his orders and left quickly. Meanwhile the general Kalanima and others ran along with him. Six hundred million pretas, bhutas, and danas followed while beating many huge damama and dadmasa drums as well. Because of all the noise the danas made you couldn’t hear anything else. The dust they raised completely blocked the sun. Virabhadra appeared at the sacrifice, and then all the danas came and smashed it. Fearing for their lives, the brahmanas displayed their sacred threads in the hopes of being spared. The danas did not kill them, but they smashed all of the surrounding structures [doors and gates]. The warriors came to destroy the sacrifice in this Ambikamahgala, the song of Kavikankana.

[21]
[Bringing along many rudras, the furious Virabhadra went to demolish the sacrifice. He smashed the home of Daksha to bits and no one was able to stop him.] Grabbing hold of the brahmanas and ripping away their books, he bound their hands with rope. If those trying to escape were seen with a sacred thread on their shoulder they were quickly recaptured. The priest presiding over the fire sacrifice ran quickly, but was caught just as swiftly—his beard was ripped off of his face. His clothes were torn off, teeth broken, and he was soundly beaten with a sacrificial ladle. Praceta [Varuna] became perturbed and ran away, but Virabhadra caught and bound him. The weeping Praceta exclaimed, “Save the sacrificial utensils! Save the lives of the brahmanas!”
Daksha’s warriors launched sharp arrows in the same way clouds send down rain in short intense bursts. They slammed into the danas and passed through their bodies into the rear ranks like a needle passes through flowers in a garland. Daksha’s front ranks entered the fray with a herd of elephants holding iron clubs in their trunks. This angered Virabhadra, and he smashed their skulls with his fists. He took horses by their hooves and swung them with such force that their limbs tore and he was left holding only their legs. When Virabhadra jumps the earth shakes and the eight principal mountains move about. The snakes leave the area. Their jewels fall off and the king of snakes became dizzy. Virabhadra tore out the eyes of Bhrgu and broke the teeth of Pusha. The sun god’s horse tore his bridle off and ran away to the horizon. The jewel of warriors Virabhadra raised his two arms and danced; he then speared that foremost of elephants [Indra’s mount Airavata]. The danas ecstatically drank the flowing blood from their cupped hands. Together the danas ran naked and filled the sacrificial pit with urine. Breaking the lock of the storehouse, they looted it while pouring honey and ghee in
their mouths. The great warrior Virabhadra severed the head of Daksha and threw it into the sacrificial pit.
Mukunda offers this to the assembly: “Listen to the punishment resulting from insults to Mahadeva.”

[22]
In this way, Virabhadra destroyed the sacrifice of Daksha in a matter of moments and left for Kailasa. Along with him the pretas, bhutas, and danas roared like lions while beating many damama and dadamasa drums. Virabhadra then bowed to Siva and made a humble offering. Siva in turn blessed him with various kinds of wealth. When Sati gave up her life at Daksha’s sacrifice, Pancanana [Siva] took to austerity.
When Siva ruined the sacrifice of Daksha, Vidhata arrived there along with Narayana. A goat’s head was joined to the body of Daksha, and by the grace of Krshna he regained his life. Having destroyed Daksha’s sacrifice, Siva now favored the Himalaya [future father of Parvati] after acknowledging his virtue. What more can I say about the good fortune of that snowy mountain? After all, the mother of the universe became his daughter. And who can measure the virtue of Menaka? It was from her womb that Candi was born as well as her brother Mainaka, who is most beautiful in this world. Purandara [Indra] was unable to cut his wings. It was for the benefit of the world that she [Candi] was born, and to the Himalaya’s credit that the world became pure.
Day by day Candi became possessed of intelligence and is auspicious in the same way the moon increases in size during the bright fortnight. The mountain king performed whatever family rituals required by society, such as the annaprasana. At age five, Candi’s ears were pierced and every day she wore attractive clothing.
Let my heart be immersed at the feet of Candi. Sri Kavikankana sings this sweet song.

[23]
Candika grew in the Himalayas. Menaka was very happy to see her with new garments and looking more beautiful every day, even without ornaments. Her thighs are like elephant trunks, her navel a deep lake, and her two arms are like lotus stems. Her pure bodily glow enhanced by various ornaments dissipates the darkness. When they see Gauri’s beautiful teeth, pomegranate seeds became dull from shame. One can guess that because of their distress, pomegranates split open when ripe. The moon is unable to look upon the beauty of Gauri’s face, so it does not come out during the day. The moon becomes dark from grief and does not traverse the skies, considering its spots to be a blemish. Gauri’s lips are friend to the jujube and her face is an autumn moon. Her eyes put those of a deer to shame. Her body is the color of a flax flower, her eyebrows the bow of Kama. She is smeared with sandalwood paste. On her nose is a pearl studded with diamonds—this finely decorates her lotus-like face. Nothing can compare to her extraordinary beauty. She shines amongst the moon and stars. Gold flower buds are tucked behind her ears and next to her tangled curly tresses they look like lightning that has lost its restlessness among dark monsoon clouds. Her thighs and hips forcefully possessed the former plumpness of her belly. Her feet are restless; her eyes are like lotus petals. The new king of youth has arrived! When he sees Gauri’s beauty, the Mountain King ponders: “To whom shall I give my daughter in marriage?”
That resident of Daminya Sri Kavikankana, being desirous of music, sings a beautiful song. 

[24]
Himalaya thinks to himself day in and day out: “Where will I find a groom who is from a good family, handsome, equal in pedigree, and worthy of my daughter? If I give my daughter to someone of lower status, we shall be humiliated in society and there will be gossip between clans. My heart will not be at peace and people will talk of our faults in performing dharma. There is great merit in finding someone of good ancestry. A mind engaged in knowledge, well behaved, and possessed of humility when found in one of good birth complements all of society like gold binding an elephant tusk. I will get together with my friends and we will apply our minds in all directions to see where we will find a pure family. That one who gets my daughter is the most fortunate in the three worlds. When that happens [my daughter’s marriage] I can rest assured.”
The great Mountain [Himalaya] joined with his friends and deliberated in a group for days. At that particular time, Narada was wandering in the area. He arrived and made his presence known. Himalaya and his friends gave him a welcoming footbath, mouthwash, and a seat of gold.
Upon receiving Candi’s command, Sri Kavikankana sings this playful and sweet song.

[25]
The mountain inquired of that best of sages with folded hands: “To whom should I give my daughter in marriage?”
Hearing the words of Hemanta, Narada replied: “Your wealth will increase because of your daughter Gauri; she will become the wife of Siva very soon, and Hara in turn will offer himself as her husband.”
After giving this advice, the servant of Hari [Narada] left. Hemanta gave up the thought of marrying his daughter to anyone else. At that moment, Hara [Siva] arrived in the Himalaya Mountain forest on the banks of the Ganga in order to perform austerity. When Himalaya saw him there, he was ecstatic. He humbly submitted these words to Siva with folded hands: “Today my ashram has become charged with virtue, connected as it is with the dust of your feet. Oh Lord, make my ashram a fruitful place. Through my daughter I will always give you kusa grass, flowers, and water.”
When Pasupati heard the humble words of Hemanta, he gave permission for Gauri to serve him. Gauri worshipped Sankara with many kinds of items. At this time
the gods in heaven became afraid of demons. Indra was defeated in battle by Taraka. Afterwards all the gods went to Brahma’s abode. There in the abode of Brahma Indra made his fear of Taraka known. Seeing this in his meditation, Brahma then gave his opinion: “Mahadeva will have a son by the name of Shadanana [Six-faced, Kartikeya] and he will be born from the womb of Parvatl. His arrow will kill Taraka, so everyone join together and plan Siva’s wedding.”
Indra bowed his head upon hearing the words of Brahma and then Vidhata continued to explain his plan: “In the city of Ayodhya there is a king by the name of Mandhata. He is as powerful as the sun and as generous as a wish-fulfilling tree. He has a son by the name of Mucakunda whose heart becomes ecstatic when he finds a battle. Until the time when Kartika comes down, give your burdens to Mucakunda.”
Indra’s heart was gladdened at Brahma’s words. He brought Mucakunda to the heavens. Now both Mucakunda and Taraka fight night and day. Indra then gave Kama a
pana and requested: “Go to Hima Mountain with your arrows of enchantment. The god Tripurari [Siva] is performing austerity there; Parvatl is also there as his helper. Siva will lust after her because of you.”
At Indra’s request, Kamadeva left in great haste taking along the spring breeze as his assistant. He took his bow and five arrows of flowers as well. The bees and cuckoo birds sang sweet songs. Madana [Kamadeva] bowed to Indra and left. Within a moment he arrived at the place of Pancanana [Siva]. Raula [Siva] was meditating there in the svastika posture; Parvatl was close by holding a water vessel in her hand. The hero Kama pulled his bow back to his ear and shot an arrow; Siva became slightly restless as a result. Seeing that his meditation had been broken, he glanced all around. He saw that bow-wielding “Five Arrow” [Kamadeva] beside him. Mahesa [Siva] rained fire through his angry glance and Madana turned to ashes while he watched. Having had his austerities interrupted, Siva left for another place and the Mountain’s daughter went back
to her father. May my heart be immersed at the feet of Abhaya. I will sing the nacadi song [song accompanied by dance] of Rati’s mourning.

[26]
The lover of Kama, Rati, took her husband’s dead body in her lap, her own body covered in dust. With her heavy hair cascading down, she tore off her ornaments and cried repeatedly for the lord of her life. “Come back to life and answer me! Take your Rati with you. You have left the love we had behind. Wherever you would go, I’d follow. Now my lord, you have done the opposite.” Falling at Kama’s feet, Rati said
pathetically: “Listen to me lord of my life! In an instant you have left your wife and put the respect given to married women out of reach for me. Your body is beautiful in this world, and your flowery bow, with its five arrows of enchantment, has fallen to the earth. Because of the results of my wicked acts, my fate is tragic. Take my allotted lifespan and stay alive forever. I will die in your stead. Whatever end you have come to I wish for the same—I will stay at your feet. You received the pana of Indra to shoot your arrow at Siva and thereby made me, Rati, into a widow. You have given me tremendous sorrow and gone off to the underworld, Lord. As far as I am concerned you have crossed into the darkness of night. Siva’s fire of anger has done you in, but not taken the life of your Rati. Oh lord of my life! Without you Rati cannot live for even a moment. This is the cause of such humiliation! Connection to this body is false; only death is certain. Everyone knows this as fact. Death in youth remains as a knife in the heart. I do not believe in solace in life. High birth, good behavior, beauty, good character, life, youth, and wealth are all useless for a widow. Oh friend of the lord of spring! Come to me and show yourself. I will dig a pit and set myself on fire.”
With colored vermilion on her forehead and a comb in her hair, she repeatedly waves a mango branch. Hulu calls are sounded again and again as Rati climbs aboard a litter. Indra’s heart is grief stricken and Rati is determined to die with her husband.
Right then Sarasvatl speaks beneficial words from the sky:
Receiving the order from Candi, I, Kavikankana, sing that which will please Bhavani [Candi].

[27]
[Sarasvatl says:] “Listen my friend Rati, I will tell you something that will benefit you. Listen closely to what I have to say. Do not destroy your body in the fire. You will get your husband Phuladhanu [he who holds a flowery bow] back without delay. Stay for a while at the home of Sambara. It is there where you will meet with your husband. Do not call yourself Rati anymore. From today you will take the name Mayavati. You will become an expert in the kitchen there and Sambara’s wife will call you her daughter. If anyone tries to use force on you, his immediate death will be assured. Sri Hari will descend [be born] to the Yadu clan and kill the demons, thereby lightening the earth’s heavy load. In Daivakl’s womb the son of Yasudeva will be born in Kamsa’s prison.
The lord Krshna will marry Rukmini first and Kamadeva will in turn be born of her womb. Upon getting Narada’s advice, Sambara will enter the lying-in room of Krshna and steal Krshna’s son. He will then throw the infant in the sea and return home. A huge fish will swallow Krshna’s son, but he will not die. That fish will be caught in a fisherman’s net and turn up as a gift in Sambara’s kitchen. You will cut the fish’s belly and get your husband back. Now I will tell you some special things in detail. You will nourish him with oil and turmeric, and in a very short time, Madana will grow into puberty. When he calls you mother, you will cover your ears. Teach him about his actual identity. After murdering Sambara, you will go to your home. Remember, if anyone tries to force you, they will certainly die. Rati bowed at Sarasvati’s feet and quickly left for the home of Sambara. May one’s heart be immersed at the feet of the fearless one Abhaya. I will sing this nacadi song on the subject of penance and austerity. 

[28]
Your body is like newly churned butter that has been mixed with the sun’s rays. By nature you are a kamalini[fmgAe like a lotus]; you will lose your life in the freezing dawn. Uma, do not go off to perform austerities. I will bind myself to your neck and stay close to you. At only eight or five years of age you have such courage to go off to the forest! What was your father thinking when he sent you to such hardship? To serve Siva is difficult; who can do this satisfactorily? Are there no other grooms in the three worlds? Why does your father, the Mountain, desire Trilocana to be your husband? I will find you a husband who is more close to your age and establish you in a home that is not lacking in anything.
In Sri Kavikankana’s telling Ambika does not obey any prohibition.

[29]
Gauri performs austerity to attain the feet of Siva. The Mother eats less and less
every day. She fasts one day and eats the next. She gave up tambula [areca nut, spices and betel leaf], oil, ornaments and sandalwood. She stands on one foot with folded hands by day and at night she sleeps on a grass mat. Gauri fasts twice and afterwards breaks it with some food. She worships and meditates; with eyes closed she thinks of Siva’s feet. At night in the month of Magha [Jan-Feb], she remained submerged in the water. That daughter of the mountain made a vow to fast for three days and break it with only three handfuls of food. The Mother then gave up rice and only eats woodapple and jujube fruits. She only drinks water from a pond. She sits amid a circle of five fires and her eyes are bloodshot from looking upward. Wearing bark garments, her hair bleached, she has a reddish complexion. Ordained by fate, she performs this in the summer months. Devi meditates on Siva’s feet constantly and eats only the leaves that fall off trees. Then she gave up eating leaves, food and drink altogether. This is why she is known as
Aparna. In order to fool her, Siva came dressed as a brahmana. He asked a question
and Gauri answered. She became a mendicant from the desire for Siva’s feet. Mukunda, that servant of Ambika [Candi], wrote this song.

[30]
“Listen, you unsurpassed beauty! On whose say-so did you, a young girl, desire that one with matted hair? You are a fine woman yet you worship a beggar, a groom who is poor and naked. Listen, oh moon-faced one. I can see that your beauty enchants the whole world. There are so many bachelors who are attractive in this world, but you
desire an old man. Oh beautiful one, your body is like gold, your teeth beautiful like gems—you desire a groom with no oil in his house and who smears his body with ash. Whose son is this Hara [Siva]? I do not know from where he comes and I do not see any brothers or other relatives. If you make Sulapani [Siva] your husband due to cruel fate, you will be an unhappy woman. He goes from house to house in search of alms while playing his two-headed dambara drum. Because of the fruits of your actions you wish for such a husband. Fate has cheated you. He wears a tiger skin, a bone necklace around his neck, and a poisonous snake for an upper garment. Accompanied by ghosts and spirits, his body is smeared with crematory ash. Why do you desire such a husband? While staying on Hara’s head the Ganga saw that he was a beggar and ran off to join with the sea. Listen, oh woman, you who are possessed of good qualities; I say this for your own good. No one loves the poor. The life of whoever has a poor husband is fruitless. Poverty destroys all good qualities. A housewife sustained on begging will spend her life in misery because no one who is respectable will socialize with the poor.”
After hearing the words of the brahmana, the Mountain’s daughter said: “O ascetic, listen to what I have to say. A woman worships whomever she desires.”
Mukunda sings this relishable song.

[31]
Hara [Siva] has written my fate onto my forehead. I will serve his feet from birth on. That one who possesses anima [the ability to make oneself tiny] and the other eight yogic perfections, whose sixteenth part takes the form of Vidhi [Brahma] that Siva
protected the world by drinking poison. Besides Mrtunjaya [Conqueror of death, Siva], who else can be my husband? He to whom Brahma and the gods pay their respects, from whom Indra desires the dust of his feet, he who is the world’s greatest wealth—who would not serve this Mahes'a’s feet?”
When Siva heard these words of Gauri he resolved to speak with her again.
Seeing the ascetic, Gauri’s lip trembled. She, who is also called Candi, left that spot and
went elsewhere. At that moment, Hara assumed his own form and he, the enemy of
Tripura [Siva] stood before Parvatl [Gauri]. When Gauri saw that lord of the three
worlds standing before her, she fell to the ground out of respect. When she saw Siva who
enchants even the god of love before her, she forgot the rules of worship out of
confusion. Knowing her intention, Siva reassured her. “I am pleased with you Gauri,
give me a flower garland. I have become beholden to you because of your austerity.”
Gauri placed her palms together and said to Sankara: “If you would be merciful and give
me a boon—Lord, give witness to my father [ask for my hand in marriage].” When Siva heard Gauri’s humble words, he sent Narada Muni to Himalaya. Arriving there, Narada related everything. When Himalaya heard Narada’s account, he melted in ecstasy.
May our hearts be immersed in the feet of Abhaya. Sri Kavikankana sings this sweet song.

[32]
Hemanta gleefully announced the news in his kingdom with the beating of large dundubhi drums. “The gods, nagas, and humans will come to my home as well as all of my relatives.” The sages came and at an auspicious moment they constructed a many-
colored canopy. It was decorated with pearls and jewels. The silk canopy was hung and lamps burned in the four directions.
“Today is an appropriate one—Gauri’s auspicious wedding day is free of any fault.” A great noise arose from the sounding of conch shells, flutes, vina, as well as mrdanga and bheri drums. The gorgeous Parvatl dressed in a yellow garment sat down on a seat. All the sages met and chanted Vedic hymns. They performed the gandha- adhivasana ceremony. Earth, perfume, stone, grass, flower garlands, paddy, clarified butter, flowers, yogurt, a svastika, vermilion, black eye salve, camphor and a conch were offered to the bride according to tradition. They bound a string to her wrist and touched a plate with a lighted lamp to her head, thereby honoring her. Gold was placed in the part of her hair, rings on her fingers, and she was blessed. Much food was offered and the Mother worshipped, then the earth was given gifts. The Vasus were worshipped, and Himalaya happily performed the nandimukha ceremony. The mothers (married women who were present) were brought there for a blessing and a hundred mothers [goddesses] came. Tulasi, Malavati, Kausalya, Arundhuti and Rsibhuvana came. Sadhu, Madhu, Hari, Gaiiga, Durga, Pari, Kamala, Kalavati, Rani, Citralekha, Nila, Subhadra, Tara, Sila, Srimati, Savitri, Bhavani, Citra, Kali, Jaya, Gauri, Sati, Maya, Karuna, Tara, Hiravati, Vijaya, Satyabhama, Rukmini, Surattama, Indu, Sindhu, Rupavati, Indrani, Sati, Sila, Bharati, Sasikala, Citralekha, Arundhati, Phullara, Purahaghari, Vimala, Vidyadharl, Sumitra, Kemkai, Parvati.
With a golden water pot in the crook of her arm, Menaka went from room to room with water. The mothers came together and made a hulu sound while they bound the mangalasutra on the bride’s wrist. Mahesa [Siva] performed the adhivasa ceremony according to the rules of the Veda. On his neck was a bone necklace, his garment a tiger skin. He then mounted a bull. The pramathas ran close behind as the king of the gods [Siva] left; the danas held lamps. The bhutas and danas also blew on their horns and rained down brickbats on the groom. Tripurari [Siva] arrived and took hold of Hemanta’s [Himalaya’s] hand. He was seated on a golden bench and given clothes, rings and garlanded by Gauri who accepted her groom. The beautiful Menaka, having prepared an area to receive the groom welcomed him by washing his hands, feet and mouth.
By composing this in various meters, Mukunda sang this pleasing pamcali. 

[33]
The beautiful Menaka poured yogurt on his [Siva’s] feet. When she saw Siva’s ornaments of poisonous snakes, bones, and ashes, her expression became gloomy and her mind troubled. Menaka wept out of affection and concern for Gauri and tears poured from her eyes. On Siva there were snake armlets and he wore a snake for a belt. He wore a tiger skin and seeing this confuses the mind. His armlets and bangles are snakes, as is his sacred thread. I have eaten my eyes [in other words, “I have committed a blunder”] to give my daughter away to such a groom. It is Gauri’s fate to be married to a son of a snake charmer. When I try to apply sandalwood paste to his forehead the snakes strike at me! Making a medicinal ointment out of clarified butter, she applied it to her forehead and with her forehead covered, her eyes burned like fire. Seeing the form of the groom, she became confused. “What kind of luck caused the moon to rise in the midst of snakes? We gave Gauri to such a husband—where is his wealth? Her father has become dull-headed and killed his daughter. It is only due to the fact that I have a garuda gem on my finger that I was not bitten by these snakes.” 
When the womenfolk saw the groom, they whispered among themselves: “May the bride’s father’s eyes become enveloped in cataracts! The groom is so old that his teeth shake in the wind!” Seeing the groom, Menaka burns up inside. Menaka’s maidservant brought over the medicine basket and there was a slice of isara root inside. The smell of the root made the snakes run away and as a result, Siva became naked in the midst of all the women. Menaka frantically bolted in embarrassment. Understanding what was happening, Nandi blew out the lights. Nandi said: “Listen Sulapani [Siva]! Take on that form of yours which enchants the god of love.”
Hara [Siva] took on a pleasing appearance by using his yogic power. His matted hair became curly locks, what was a tiger skin became cloth garments, the ashes on his body became fragrant sandalwood paste, the bone necklace turned into one made of gems and a yellow mark adorned his forehead. The snake Vasuki became a crown on his head and other snakes transformed into armlets and bangles. The crescent moon adorned
his crown and he took on the form of Madana [the love god] in this attractive pastime. The horn whistle tied to his neck became a gold medallion. When Menaka saw this she abandoned her reservations about the bridegroom. When all the young girls present saw him they silently abused their husbands in their minds.
Writing this verse in ekapadi meter, Mukunda sings this Kavikankana song. 

[34]
Everyone says that Gauri has gotten herself a good husband. His form, which even enchants the god of love, is lighting up the room. One married woman says: “Hey, my husband has elephantiasis. How much fever medicine can I collect? In the month of Bhadra (August-September) the sores are stubborn. When I rub oil on the swollen part it makes me want to vomit.”
One woman says: “My husband has no teeth. He cannot eat anything but greens and soft vegetables. On a day when I cook a more firm dish, he beats me with a wooden seat and I can only sit in the corner and cry.”
One woman says: “My karma is bad. My unlucky husband is blind in both eyes and there is no woman anywhere who is sadder than me. My husband is always lost to me despite the fact that he stays right next to me.”
Another young woman says: “My husband is totally deaf. The family life of others is fine, but my marriage is nothing but agony. I speak with him in sign language all day long and with him it is like sleeping with an animal at night.”
Another woman says: “May a thunderbolt strike me in the head!”
Yet another woman says: “To say this makes me embarrassed. I cannot go
out and about in town without dying from shame. People gossip when they see my short husband with me his lanky wife.”
Just then an old lady came and when she saw the groom she became overcome with lust. Her son had a son, who had a daughter. She said: “My hair has turned grey from medicinal oil, but I am old indeed. My grandson’s daughter’s wedding was beautiful. Come here and see, my friendly groom, I will take you on my lap.”
Right then seven widows arrived. When they saw the beauty of the groom, they raised their hands up to their noses [in astonishment], [They thought:] “I have a beautiful talented granddaughter at home. I will marry her off to this one and keep him close by.”
Whenever a woman saw the groom she mentally disparaged her own husband. Keeping his heart at Siva’s feet, Kavikankana writes this Ambikamangala.

[35]

The god Pancanana [Siva] mounted a bull and someone took hold of the canopy. Gauri circled Siva seven times. Greeting him, she threw down a pana and bowed down. Gauri placed a gem necklace around Mahesa’s [Siva’s] neck. Seeing this, the gods’ happiness greatly increased. With hair standing on end, the couple performed the chamani ceremony. All the wives of the gods cheered with an ululation. Brahma in his capacity as presiding priest gave a speech and the ecstatic Himalaya gave away his daughter in marriage. Hara and Gauri sat together on one seat and Brahma the grandfather tied their garments together. The couple worshipped the fire with flowers.
Hara and Gauri gazed upon the star Arundhuti. They were given water pots, plates,
a cow and bedding as gifts. A house and gold were presented to Siva. Padmavati gave Jaya and Vijaya to the couple and the King of Mountains humbly offered them to Parvati. Mahesa and Bhavani both ate rice cooked in sweet milk and spent the night on a bed of flowers. Siva stayed at home during the night and passed much of the time in many kinds of erotic play. Writing sweet verse in the ekapadi meter, Mukunda sings Kavikankana’s song.

[36]
Jaya and Vijaya got together and rubbed the scurf off of Gauri’s body by massaging her with saffron and sandalwood paste. Gauri made a pretty doll out of that substance for her amusement. It was the color of the sun at dawn and had a short plump body with four arms. Its nails rivaled the white kunda flower and its belly was big. A rope that aids in performing yoga postures hung on its chest. It wore a tiger skin, a colorful necklace and there were various ornaments on its four arms. Its two feet rivaled blooming lotuses, and on them were appealing bells. Gauri built a staff, trident and noose and placed them in its hands. She built whatever ornament was needed for its limbs but didn’t have enough dirt to make its head. At that moment, Siva came home from begging and Gauri bashfully entered the house. Sulapani [Siva] asked, “Tell me truthfully Jaya, who made this doll? Jaya replied: “Lord Mahesa, it was Gauri who made the doll.”
This is the appealing song of that resident of Daminya Sri Kavikankana who aspires to compose music.

[37]
After hearing the words of Jaya, Sankara said: “Someone gave Gauri a boon upon
knowing her desire. I have understood that she wants a child from her creation of this doll. She has no baby to play with in the house.”
Having spoken, he signaled Nandi with a wink of his eye. Nandi left carrying a sharp sword. After going some distance, Nandi saw an elephant. He playfully insulted the elephant while standing at his head. He then cut its head off with one stroke of his sword and took it over to Pancanana [Siva]. Siva joined the head to the body of the doll and the doll became animated from his touch. On Siva’s order, Jaya took up the son with pleasure. She placed that darling boy in Parvati’s [Gauri’s] lap. Seeing her desired son with an elephant’s head, Gauri slapped her forehead and wept. Siva told Gauri: “Do not be sad, you are very fortunate to have a son with the face of an elephant.” This son is the ruler of obstacles in this world. He will be worshipped first among all the gods, and all of the kings beginning with Purandara [Indra] will worship him. He will be the foremost of all and for that reason his name will be Ganesa [literally means “lord of the people.” Ganesa is he who removes all obstacles].”
When Sulapani [Siva] said these words, Bhavani [Gauri] considered Ganadhipa [Ganesa] her son.
May our hearts be immersed at Abhaya’s feet. Now I will sing about the birth of Kartikeya.









