Pala Three -- Second Day Daytime
[38]
In a room made of flowers, Parvatl and Sankara were engaged together on a
flowery bed. That unbearable arrow of the love god Madana afflicted their limbs and
their bodies were covered in goose bumps. Now hear the story of Kartika’s birth: Listen
to this story about why Kartika has six heads; it removes all wickedness. If you hear this,
it will destroy impurity. During the pleasure of lovemaking, Mahesa’s [Siva’s] seed
discharged. Gauri was unable to hold on to it so she threw it into the fire. The fire could
not tolerate it so he in turn threw it in the water of the Ganga. The Ganga was unable to
stand the strong restless waves it caused, so she left it in a stand of reeds. It is there in the
reeds where the unfailing seed of Siva became that ocean of qualities that is the six-faced youth Kartika. His body is the color of gold; he adorned the base of the reeds like a new golden sun. Kirtika and the rest of the moon’s six wives [stars] found him without delay. Kirtika lifted him up and placed him in the lap of Rohini, Mrgasira kissed him; Ardra and Punarvasu knew him to be a great ray of light. Pushya nursed him greatly. Remembering his past as the six-headed god [Kartika] drank breast milk with six mouths. All of them [the stars] adorned with ornaments, they nursed the boy and then presented
him to the lap of Gauri. Seeing his two sons and three maidservants, he became desirous [of family life] and stayed at the home of his in-laws. Because of fate
[intervention of the gods], Gauri became embroiled in an argument with her mother. Sri Kavikankana speaks nectar.

[39]
Parvati rolled a black and red in a row while playing dice, and Padmavati rolled the same. Gauri [Parvati] then held out her hand and called out “ten-ten.” At that moment, Menaka’s displeasure intensified “My honor as a householder has been ruined because of you, girl,” she said. “How long will I keep and support my son-in-law in our home? At dawn Kartika and Ganesa cry for rice and there is no possibility at all of finding any cowries in your room to buy anything. Your husband wanders about on the pretext of work and does no farming. How much food and clothing will I have to supply during the course of a year? When the milk boils over, you do not even bother to add a little water, but you play dice with your friend day and night! Your husband is a pauper; his only garment is a tiger skin. His only possession is an old bull, and around his neck hangs a bone necklace. Ghosts and spirits are his companions. And how many days will I pay for his bhanga? My husband says nothing because of the shame he suffers, and because of my son-in-law there is fear of snakes in the house. There are two sons, three maidservants and your husband Sulapani [Siva] and I have no idea how many pretas, bhutas and pisacas there are hanging around! How long will I suffer from this disturbance? My bones are arthritic from all the cooking and cleaning.” Gauri says: “My father gave your son-in-law land, and he grows vetch,
mustard, sesame, cotton and rice. You cook and clean Mother, and then you say so many hurtful things. From today I have put thorns at your door. Live here happily with your son Mainaka. How much more can I take your insults? I will go somewhere else.”
Saying this, Gauri gave up her attachment and affection for her family and left, tears falling from her eyes. Gauri then told Sankara the whole story. Thus the twice-born Sri Kavikankana wrote this pamcali.

[40]
After conferring with Gauri, Siva and their entourage left his in-laws’ house for Kailasa Mountain. Gosani [Siva] thought for a while and decided that begging was necessary. The lord of all the gods Hara [Siva] mounts his best of bulls and begs alms. He beats the dambura drum and blows his horn. Hearing this increases the pleasure of the town dwellers that give him alms. He begs from door to door with Vasuki the king of snakes around his neck, the moon on his forehead, ashes adorning his body, snakes with precious gems encircled his head, and earrings swayed in his ears. Tucked behind his ear is a dhutura flower, its root unparalleled, and Vasuki ornaments his crown. He wanders up river where the homes of the komca [Koch] people are located and the komca wives offer alms to him on platters. Siva takes the plates of uncooked rice and dumps them in his bag. That bag hangs twelve measures long. Some give rice and cowries, others gave beans and dried bean balls. The oil presser filled a length of bamboo with oil and donated it. The salt merchant gave salt, the dairymen gave ghee and curds, and a merchant gave a doll made of cannabis. The sweet maker gave puffed rice and jaggery, the carpenter gave parched rice and the tambuli offered areca nuts wrapped in betel leaves. It was noon when Mahadeva [Siva] came home and Kartika went over to him. Mahesa [Siva] emptied his bag; there was a fair amount of rice, and he put various things away in different places. When the two boys saw the sweetened puffed rice they came running and started to fight over it. Gauri calmed them down and divided the sweets between the two, and then she cooked. Hara, Gauri, Kartika and Ganesa all dined and so the night passed in happiness.
The great Misra Jagannatha is the father of Hrdaya Misra. Kavicandra is his heart’s delight [son]. His younger brother, Sri Kavikankana, who was ordered by Candi, wrote this.

[41]
Sulapani [Siva] spent the night in bed remembering the name of Rama, and then arose at dawn. After finishing his daily duties, Mahadeva [Siva] sat upon an elephant skin while Kartika and Ganesa sat at his right and left respectively. Sankara [Siva] called for his wife, and Gauri came before him with palms together. Sankara spoke playfully: “Yesterday I became unhappy from wandering around so many different areas. This morning I will rest at home after having a meal. O mother of Ganesa, today you will cook what I want to eat. Cook a bitter dish of broad beans with neem leaves and eggplant. In winter sukta tastes so sweet! So cook lots of pumpkin and eggplant. Make some natiya greens with whole jackfruit seeds, about ten or so, and add some dried pea balls with the juice of ginger. Dry fry some mustard greens and thoroughly cook some bathuya greens in pungent oil. Cook red lentils in water with limejuice and cook some karanja fruit in rock candy syrup. Take the banana flower dumplings fried in ghee
and place them in syrup. Fill bamboo sections with dumplings and fry them; cook chick pea soup with sugar. Shake off your laziness and cook it for about forty minutes. Cook arum root coated in a wet paste of ground spices (or, chickpea flour) and make some pumpkin balls [kumudara badi]. Fry some jackfruit seeds and give me some. Singe some cumin in ghee and cook some spinach in it. Quickly make sour chutney, whole kasandi [whole mustard seed and green mango sauce] and sour lime juice; do not delay. I want you to prepare ten different vegetable dishes according to my tastes. Gauri, if you will cook it then I will eat ten pots of boiled sweet milk.” When Gauri heard the words of Siva, she put her hands together and humbly submitted: “We used whatever you brought home yesterday to fill our stomachs and whatever was left we already prepared. You have selected good dishes, but we do not have the ingredients for even the first course! If you are going to be such a nuisance today then at least you should be able to bring some rice, Lord!”
Let our hearts be immersed at the feet of Abhaya. I will sing the nacadi of Hara and Gauri’s quarrel. 

[42]
Siva says: “I am leaving home and going to some other place. What am I doing in a household? You keep house independently with Guha [Kartika] and Gaja [Ganesa]. I bring so much home that it is impossible to calculate the amount, yet all of that food has been devoured. The many mice that conspire with Ganesa’s rat steal it all. Guha’s peacock is a strong runner; he catches snakes and eats them. It occurs to me that it is not fitting for me to stay in such a nasty home.”
A tiger runs away when it sees the quarrel and notices the expression on Siva’s face. The oxen are weak and stagger about. They do not eat grass or drink any water.
“Bring my tiger skin, horn and bone necklace! Bring me my drum, ashes and bag! Come Nandi; come along with me. I Suli [Siva, one who carries a trident] will not stay in this house.”
Saying these words, Sankara left home riding on his bull.
Writing in an excellent meter, Mukunda sang this. Sri Kavikankana composes.

[43]
“Who knows how I ended up with Siva for a husband as a result of my austerity? My friends do not come here when they see a naked man lounging about. The father’s snakes and my son’s peacock are always fighting. Ganesa’s rat eats holes in the begging bag and I am the one who gets all the abuse. The tiger and oxen always fight—how can I prevent that? This unfortunate Gauri’s forehead [fortune] has been ruined by the gods’ intervention. There’s fighting between the peacock and rat and there is always quarreling going on. It is for these reasons that there is always discord—It is from the results of my past actions, the fault of my karma that I am so unhappy. It is fate that made me a housewife who lives on rice gotten by begging. My husband is crazy, naked, and smears ashes on his body. When he stands, the matted locks on his head hit the floor. I cannot sleep in the same bed with him because of the snakes’ breath, and there are other living things crawling around in his tiger skin garment that cause pain. I humiliate myself by
taking out loans—to pay them back causes an argument. When I speak the truth, I am everyone’s enemy. My father gave a dowry of sorrow when he married off his Gauri. To stir up these errors again and again is wrong and calamitous. Padma, why am I slandered so? My lord does not speak with me even when I do nothing wrong. Siva, you can stay here by yourself—I am leaving!” Taking Jaya, Vijaya, Guha [Kartika], and Lambodara [Ganesa] along with her, Gauri goes to the home of her mother and father. At that moment, Padma explains to Durga—in this Ambikamangala by Sri Kavikankana.

[44]
O Daughter of the Mountain [Parvati], listen to me. I will tell you a story of the future, the history of your worship. You will establish rituals of your adoration on earth throughout the ages. At the end of the Dvapara Yuga, in the land where the king of Kalinga rules, you will appear in the form of Mangalacandika to that king and tell him of your worship performed at a temple built by the architect of the gods, Visvakarma, which takes away bad fortune and sorrow. You will accept veneration from the animals and make the lion their king. You will give him your sword as a symbol. You are the source of both good and bad fortune. You plant the trees and grasses on earth and establish the animals in the forest. In the first part of the Kali Yuga you will place the son of Indra, Nilambara, in a clan of hunters. Bringing him to earth on a false pretext, you will take his water and flowers. In the end, you will take him to the city of the gods. On the false pretext of interrupting the rhythm during her dance, you will demote Ratnamala to earth. There she will become famous as Khullana. She will become a member of the gandhavanika merchant community and marry Dhanapati. Her husband will go off to a foreign land and a stubborn co-wife will cause her much pain. Khullana will worship you in the forest for the benefit of her husband and be a most faithful wife. You will appear before her. Her husband will come home and she will enjoy lovemaking with him. A son, the former Maladhara, will arrive in her womb. Relatives will doubt her chastity but you will assist her when she’s in danger. Dhanapati will receive the order of the king and leave for Simhala along with seven ships. After kicking your water pot icon, six of his ships will sink and a king will take him prisoner. Sripati will be his son and he will take seven boats along with him when searching for his father. You will be merciful and grant him the king’s daughter in marriage, then bring him back home. When Narayani heard the words of Padma, she became ecstatic and remembered Visvakarma.
His heart benefited by the presence of Uma’s [Gauri’s] feet, Cakravarti Sri Kavikankana composed this new song. 

[45]
Candika took the advice of Padma to heart and consulted with her about specific ways to achieve what she wanted. Bhagavati thought of Visvakarma and he immediately appeared before her. Visvakarma paid his respects by lying down on the ground before her. Bhagavati complimented him and gave him a pana.
“I give you the responsibility to build me a temple in Kalinga which will be the center of my worship.”
Visvakarma replied: “I can certainly build a temple if you bring that great hero Hanumana here to assist me.”
While they conversed, Maruti [Hanumana] arrived. Candi received him respectfully and put a pana in his hand. Visvakarma arrived at the banks of the Kamsa River and started construction at the foot of a mangosteen tree at an auspicious moment. Visai [Visvakarma] measured the site at a total of ninety-seven hands and constructed a plinth out of sapphire. Hanumana placed a mountain on his head and brought it to the site. They built the temple within the course of a night. The crown of the temple was made of diamonds, sapphires, and emeralds, and surrounded with mirrors. White yak’s tails, tridents, and flags were added. They surrounded the full moon appearing like a flock of cranes. There were variegated and colorful images and among them was the golden icon of Bhagavati. There were also two golden water pots and Siva was sitting on a bull. Kartika was riding a peacock, Ganes'a on a rat. Hanumana took permission from Abhaya and carved instructions for worship into a rock. Hanumana dug out a lake with his fingernails and built an enclosure around its four sides like a mountain. He carved steps to the water out of stone and made four landings. He also carved pictures in stone along the main road. When he saw that the lake was empty, Hanumana broke through to the underworld and brought up the waters of the Bhogavati. Visvakarma made a garden that surrounded the lake and Hanumana planted juicy jackfruit, bananas, palm fruit, coconuts, areca palms, pomegranates, and dates. He also planted citrus trees such as tangerines, lychee, oranges, and limes. He planted flower trees: the double-flowered Arabian jasmine, flame of the forest, michelia, rosebay, holy basil, Spanish jasmine, Indian jasmine, coral jasmine, flax, satavarga flowers, malati jasmine, needle flower jasmine, star jasmine, amaranth, lotus, sweet flag, violet, trumpet flower, and asoka. The son of the wind, Hanumana, may he stay awake night and day, took sandalwood trees
from Malaya Mountain and planted them. As they finished construction the night came to an end. Candi bid them farewell after rewarding them. Then Candi went to the king in order to appear in his dream. So sings Sri Kavikankana the servant of Abhaya.

[46]
At the close of night, Bhagavati stands by the king’s head and speaks to him in a dream. When he sees the goddess his two eyes are blessed; he listens with the hairs on his body standing on end. “Listen, King of humans. I speak the truth with certainty. Listen to me, King of Kalinga! Give up performing the Daksha sacrifice. Siva has destroyed Daksha’s sacrifice and he will not be coming to the earth for a long while. After much deliberation I have come to your land and will accept your worship before all others. I will destroy your enemies, increase your family lineage, and make you the king of humans. I will be merciful to you and make your army victorious. You will rule the earth under one royal insignia (umbrella). I will increase your fame and make the world come under your influence. I will make you the crown jewel of all kings. I planted a flower garden and built my own temple on the banks of the Kamsa River. Take your ministers along with a priest immediately and worship there oh sage king. I am Dakshi the daughter of Daksha. In Kasi I am Visalakshi; in Naumisa [Naimisa] forest I am Lingahara; in Prayaga I am known as Lalita; in Purushottama [Puri] I am Vimala; in Gandhamadana I am Kamarati; In Gokula I am known as Gomati; in Tamaluka I am Bargabhima; in the north I am Visvakaya; in Hastinapura I am Jayanti; I am Vijaya in the home of Nanda; and in the presence of Hari I am Mahamaya.”
When the king realized who stood before him, he took hold of Candi’s feet. The bells on her feet filled the air with the fifth note. The dawn arrived; there was a great noise of horns blowing and the people in all homes were gladdened.
The great Misra Jagannatha is Hrdaya Misra’s father; Kavicandra is his heart’s pleasure (son). Kavicandra’s younger brother Sri Kavikankana receives the order of Candi and writes this.

[47]
When the king saw this dream signaling his good fortune he was supremely happy and gave an announcement accompanied by the beat of large dundubhi drums: “All the subjects of Kalinga will worship the goddess Trilocana [Three-eyed, Candi] in every home accordingly.”
After taking his bath at dawn, the king gave gifts to the brahmanas and to the bards he gave elephants and horses. Wearing a rudraksha necklace around his throat, the king propitiated the goddess residing in a pair of gold water pots at an opportune moment. The king worshiped Haimavati [Candi] with great pleasure while brahmanas chanted Vedic hymns, and the conch, bells dampha drums, khamaka, and jagajhampa drum were played along with a damuru drum.
Seeing this temple with its golden water pots seemingly come out of nowhere, everyone was amazed and confused. Everyone, young and old alike, even the birds and animals ran over to see it. There next to the banks of the Kamsa River was an
unusual temple made of gold. When they heard of the temple, the newly married wives in the area ran off to see it independently. The head priest and all his family repeatedly prayed along with the king. Expertly and according to the rules, they brought food offerings of sugar, honey, and curds, all in copious amounts. There was music made by the conch shell and mrdanga drum, a pair of dokhandi vinas, and someone played the dama drums while sitting on an elephant. The large-hipped women shouted for victory when they saw the elephants arrive. That virtuous king worshipped there with sixteen items for eight Tuesdays. He offered a hundred buffaloes, goats, and sheep as well as red swans in sacrifice. He also offered rice, eight durva grass blades, and water from the Ganga in pots made of gold. With his hands full of lotus flowers, the king worshiped Candika while the vidyadharis danced and sang. Worshipping with his family and bowing down repeatedly, the king put his two palms together in a gesture of respect. He circled around the temple, bowing down as he went. He chanted verses of praise and the hairs on his body stood on end.
That abode of unlimited qualities by the name of Sri Raghunatha is the king of the land where brahmanas dwell. That member of his court, Mukunda, has written wonderful verse for singing. 

[48]
Durga, oh Durga, you are supreme and the destroyer of adversity. Jaya, daughter of Yasoda, you protected Gokula. In the form of sleep you fooled the guards when Daivaki gave birth to Krshna. You are Vishnu’s helper in many incarnations. Durga, you destroy harm and take away misfortune. You are the whirlpool in the Yamuna River and extremely frightful [or large-fanged]. You took the lead in the form of a jackal. You removed the weight of the earth by your appearance. You brought Krshna across the Yamuna because of fear of King Kamsa. You had lay down in the lap of Daivaki for fun and Kamsa lifted you up by your hands and feet in order to slay you. You are portrayed in the Harivamsa as the destroyer of danger and so you did Krshna’s bidding by cheating Kamsa. You are the daughter of Nanda and the killer of Sumbha and Nisumbha. You are praised by the whole world and live in the Vindhya Mountains. You are decorated with many types of flowers and have eight powerful arms. The protectors of the ten
directions [Lokapalas] worship you with blood sacrifice. In order to kill Ravana, the gods got together and Brahma called on you out of season. Then Rama worshipped you with many different offerings. It was only then that Ravana fell in battle. Madhu and Kaitabha came from Vishnu’s ear and went to kill Brahma with the strength of their own arms. Brahma worshiped Bhagavati while sitting in the lotus that sprouts from Vishnu’s navel. It was the intention of Vishnu to kill those two asuras. Can that person who does not assist you ever hope to receive the blessing of devotion to Hari? It is evident from the
actions of Nanda the cowherd and the young women of Vraja that the worship of Katyayani results in a boon from you.
The king of Kalinga thus sang the goddess’s praises; Bhagavati [Candi] blessed him and left for Kailasa. Composing this sweet verse in ekapadi meter, Mukunda sang this Sri Kavikankana song.

[49]
The king gave each brahmana one tola [160 grains] of gold as a gift. He took the dust of their feet on his head. He also engaged brahmanas at the temple in daily worship. One hundred brahmanas read the Saptasati there daily. While Candi herself went off to Siva’s abode in Kailasa, her incarnation received worship in Kalinga. Next to the Biju forest, hundreds of animals were able to be in the presence of Candika when traveling down the path. Among them were lions, tigers, rhinoceroses, horses, and elephants as well as eight-footed antelope, mules, wild cows, and deer. There were so many different animals that I am not able to describe then all. They came one by one to Abhaya and bowed at her feet. They then lifted their heads, gazed upon her and said:
“Be merciful and accept our worship Mahesvari! Even though we cause no offence we’re always afraid. Bless us Bhagavati and make us fearless.”
Bhagavati was merciful to the animals and gave them permission to worship her. When the animals received her order, they were overflowing with joy. They searched throughout the forest and brought back many wild flowers. They also brought mangos,
rose apple, siyakuli, and other fruits in season. They offered this and washed her feet with water from the Kamsa River. The animals circled the goddess and bowed down repeatedly. She in turn blessed them all with fearlessness.
“The tiger shall not eat the deer and the lion shall leave the baby elephants alone. Horse and buffalo will live in the same forest. The rabbit and wildcat shall also live together freely. If you remember me,I will rid you of sorrow.
May our hearts be immersed at the feet of Abhaya. I have established the animals in the forest with a six-footed verse.

[50]
After accepting the worship of the animals, Mahamaya made the lion king of the forest and gave him her sword. Candi was merciful to the animals; she gave whatever was needed to each one.
“Lion, you are a great and strong warrior. You are the king among all the animals.”
After saying this, Bhavani put a mark on the lion’s forehead.
“Wolf, listen to me. Take hold of this white umbrella and stand by the side of the king. Antelope, you are of noble birth and the sage among animals. You are comparable to the brahmana in human society; therefore you will be the priest and always engage in thinking about the wellbeing of all. This work does not suit anyone else. The tiger, bear, wolf, and boar will banish all sorrow. O great warrior Rhinoceros, you become the chief minister to the king in the same relationship as a teacher and pupil. Every day you will supply flowers and water. The king of the forest gave his assurance to the elephant, which in turn became the royal mount. She brought many horses to serve as mounts; the young elephants carried the monkeys.
“Listen to me Yak. I am engaging you to fan your tail on the king’s body. O howling Jackal, I am giving you the responsibility of being the king’s herald, and I will ride on your back with pleasure. Mongoose, you are the doctor and your income will be derived from land set aside for your stipend. You will treat everyone in the kingdom and you will be initiated into the discipline of medicine in order to protect the animals— snakes will never defeat you. Buffalo, you will be the commander of the army and feed on the crops of the subjects as your pay. You also will serve as royal gatekeeper, stay awake at night, and call out every three hours. The jackal will be the police guard. The blue-throated deer, antlered deer, and long-eared deer will be the treasurer, village headman, and capable official of the kingdom respectively. Because of your worship of me you will live in the forest happily and the tiger will not eat any of you. The camel and ass will live on charity. They will be servants of the crown and carry both the fortunes and misfortunes of all. All of the rest of the animals will be subjects, and the kalasara deer will be their leader.”
The great Misra Jagannatha is the father of Hrdaya Misra. Kavicandra is their heart’s delight. His younger brother receives the command of Candi — that Sri Kavikankana wrote this.
 
[51]
When Abhaya [Candi] arrived in Kalinga it was then that Mahesa [Siva] accepted worship in the land of mortals [earth]. All the nagas worship him in the seven underworlds; Hara grants them boons thereby chasing away their sorrow. Those righteous humans on earth worship an earthen icon of Sankara [Siva] after performing the ritual of animation (calling on the deity to inhabit the icon). The humans built a temple to Siva in the center of the city; after obtaining a boon, the human race became valorous. In the month of Caitra they propitiate Hara [Siva] with many gifts and beat the huge dhaka and dhola drums at the Siva temple. They cut their tongues, pierce their tongues and swing on the caraka. They all go to their desired heaven, not to hell. In the Treta
Yuga, the ten-headed Ravana became an ascetic—the humans on earth do likewise. The
pisacas and danavas worship Siva every day. That person who worships Sankara is never lacking in wealth. In Amaravati Indra worships Siva. His son Nilambara supplies flowers for the puja. Sulapani [Siva] accepted their offerings and returned to Kailasa at which time Devi arrived at the abode of Siva. Durga folded her hands and bowed. Pasupati blessed in turn and inquired of her news. Bhavani told him about progress of her puja. She held Siva’s feet and spoke a few words to him:
“My puja is performed for eight days on the earth.”
She spoke with Siva about Nilambara for three days: “If you curse Nilambara and bring him down to earth, then my worship will be established there.”
Siva said: “I do not see the least bit of a fault in Nilambara, so why would I curse him?”
“If that son of Indra desires to go to earth on his own then you will not be at fault if you curse him.”
Siva accepted and took a pana from Durga. The Ambikamangala is the song of Kavikankana.

[52]
Indra the king sat in the Sudharma assembly on a colorful gold throne. Brhaspati sat before the king with his books. About a hundred young boys surrounded the two brothers Sri Jayanta and Nilambara, both equal in status. The main attendant supplied areca nuts and betel leaves mixed with camphor. The assembly is seated and Matuli fans them with a gold-handled yak tail whisk. The heralds recite praises with their hands folded on their heads. Pavaka and the rest of the masters of the directions, Varuna [god of the sea], Nairiti [regent of the southwestern direction], Samana [Yama, god of death], Kuvera [god of wealth], Prabhanjana [violent winds], and all of the gods came to the residence of Mahendra. Durvasa, Jaimuni [Jaimini], Angira and the rest of the talented sages came to the palace of the great king of heaven. At that moment Narada the son of Virinci [Brahma] arrived on the scene. The lord of the suras arose and bowed down out
of respect; he sat Narada down on a seat of gold. He inquired about news from his dear friend — Sri Kavikankana composes.

[53]
“Narada, tell me about the news of the land. You have been here and there; tell me everything.” There’s no one within the three worlds who is equal to you. You know the past, future and present. We are fortunate to have the dust of your feet in our home and I have become purified from your presence. Seeing your mercy towards me it occurs to my mind that the goddess of fortune Lakshmi will stay in my house forever. Whoever hears the sweet sound of your vina will be victorious in all the worlds.”
When Narada heard the words of Indra, he spoke. Mukunda wrote this song in verse that steals the heart.

[54]
“Indra, what more can I say? Just talking about it is painful. I submit this story to you with great trepidation. The evil ones Canda, Jambha, Sumbha, and Nisumbha increasingly became your formidable enemies. Renouncing all comforts, they worshiped Mahadeva [Siva] daily over a four-hour period using a hundred flowers. Take heed
King; the asuras are strong. Sumbha and Nisumbha are excellent fighters. What can I say about the arrogance of most powerful Jambha? He rips up mountains with his bare hands and gets his strength from the fruits of his Mahadeva worship. He grabs mountains with upraised hands and flings them. What can I say about his offerings: There are many types of flowers, saffron, musk, and food. And what of his worship using sixteen ingredients as well as his gifts of huge amounts of gold! In order to show his affection to Siva, he sings and dances, and in the evening he beats the drum many times. When the fourteenth lunar day arrives, that warrior fasts until the evening. That demon worships
Tripurari [Siva] with a specific goal in mind and this leaves me with an uneasy feeling. I have understood through the demon’s activities which kingdom he will usurp. I can at least figure out that much. You enjoy many pleasures in the company of women and you have become forgetful because of your royal privilege. Having gotten boons from Siva, the demons have taken up weapons. Trouble is soon to follow.”
After hearing the words of Narada, Vasava [Indra] took note and applied his mind to the worship of Siva: “Matuli, heed my words and bring Nllambara to me.”
Sri Kavikankana wrote this.

[55]
“Nilambara, take this pana as my command to you for picking flowers. Pay attention to what I have to say. You are not required to fight in wars with troublesome asuras and I will not send you off to distant lands. The only thing I ask of you is to pick flowers for about an hour and a half and bring them back to me. Lest you feel that this is too troublesome — Yayati’s son, the elegant and handsome Puru, accepted old age in place of his father. He (whose mind resides in a peaceful state) gave up his own youth and now his fame is known throughout the three worlds. Raghunatha exiled himself to the forest on his father’s command; he renounced the golden throne. With his wife Janaki and brother Lakshmana by his side, he set out on the forest path. His fame is complete in the three worlds. On the father’s orders, the son did something inappropriate. This is the example set by Bhrgupati [Parasurama], After hearing his father’s story, he cut off his mother’s head. His fame is proclaimed throughout the universe. It is not a big deal; I only ask that you go to the Nandana forest for about an hour and a half. Whatever flowers you may find at hand, you do not have to climb any trees, with those I will propitiate Sankara [Siva].” When he saw that Purandara [Indra] was annoyed, the boy Nilambara took the pana in his hand with hands joined together. With flower basket and hook in hand he left down the forest path in Sri Kavikankana’s song.

[56]
After bathing in the Ganga and donning a white garment, Nilambara set out at dawn. With basket and hook in hand he entered the forest while thinking of Sankara [Siva]. He picked and counted one hundred flowers. Entering the forest, the boy was ecstatic. He saw the six seasons existing simultaneously. There were white lotus, water lilies, ivy leaf morning glories, water weeds, duck lettuce, lotus, ginger blossoms, and blue lotus flowers as well as asoka, kino, kurubak flowers, Spanish jasmine, and balsam, jungle geranium, and rose chestnut flowers, all of which he picked. There were amaranth, philipine violets, star jasmine flowers that he picked along with lime flowers, kadamba, pterosperm, and oleander. He gathered clove, holy basil, wormwood, deeringia, flame of the forest, pratyangira, and thorn apple. With a happy heart the boy picked aldevane flowers along with Indian mulberry, michelia and golden rose- chestnut. He picks white and red hibiscus and single-flowered Arabian jasmine, star jasmine, and rosebay flowers. There were double-flowered Arabian jasmine, flame of the forest, prickly topped grass, wild basil, rooster grass, sesame, night-blooming jasmine, and coral tree flowers. He picked prickly chaff flowers, baghanala, gum acacia, bhadrakala, as well as red lotus flowers. He picked flame lily and spikenard, and he removed the thorns from the Indian nightshade. He gathered galangale, and saptadala, phyllanthus, tellicherry bark, screwpine, emetic nut, blue hydrangea, hemp, purple orchid, and trumpet flower, syamalata, hogweed, kalyakara, mahua flowers, vasantika, and whole Bengal quince. He brought down branches of the mangosteen, chirauli nut, and dammer [sala\ trees and gathered up loads of mangrove. He then picked milkweed, tamarind, lobelia, yellow-berried nightshade, white spikenard, suryamani flowers, and basil. He filled his basket with more lotuses, asparagus, barleria, and dulala. He picked white rose, cucumber, jasmine, indraroot, tangerine, and grasses. He thought about it, and then with a relaxed mind picked Indian beech, acacia, pomegranate, and red basil. It was now time for the worship. Nilambara threaded a hundred or so garlands and arrived running. He covered the flowers with a lotus leaf and left it at the place of worship.
Sri Kavikankana’s song is rich and flavorful.

[57]
Shouts of victory were heard in all directions and that lord of ghosts, Siva, was worshiped ecstatically with full concentration. Musicians along with a hundred or so of their sons accompanying them played the dokhandi vina, conch and mrdahga. In the first part of the day, Vagisa [Sarasvati] sang the section of the Samaveda, which glorifies Rudra. Narada with vina in hand sings of the great qualities and glories of Sankara [Siva]. Sankara, who was looked upon with love, was seated on a golden platform and his feet were washed. Saci wiped his feet with a cloth and welcomed him with garments and priceless jewels. Siva’s ceremonial bath was performed with hundreds of pots of Ganga water, and he was outfitted with clothing that outshone the moon’s light. A dab of musk was applied to his forehead. He was rubbed with musk, saffron and sandalwood paste by Vasava [Indra]. Along with the residents of the city, he worshiped Purahara [Siva] with sixteen ingredients. The lord of the gods, Siva, played the dambura drum and blew his horn. Tridasapati [Indra] danced alongside of Pramathapati [Siva]. The dampha drum resounded with a tadhimdhinga sound. There were prayers in both prose and verse and there were many noises made with the mouth. Then everyone paid their respects by lying prostrate on the ground and touching all eight parts of their bodies to the earth. Vasava [Indra] always worships from the heart with total dedication and so
pleased the god Umapati [Siva]. In this way, he worshiped Siva daily by these rules for twelve years and every day Nilambara wanders through the forest picking hundreds of flowers. In order to quickly establish her worship over there (on earth), Bhavani [Candi] appeared in the forest. It is she whose story dances in the mouth of Kavikankana as he composes this pamcali.

[58]
Scheming with Padmavati, Candi arrived in the Nandana forest and employed her illusory powers. She made the Nandana forest bereft of flowers and all of the groves within became bare of both fruit and flowers. Afterwards Nilambara entered a flower garden with baskets and a hook in his left hand. Seeing that there were no flowers, he thought: “Where will I find a hundred flowers in the space of three hours?”
Nilambara became extremely concerned about finding flowers; he climbed into a chariot and traveled to the earth. While en route he saw omens of impending doom; a kite circled around his head and a woodcutter with a load of firewood crossed his path. Nilambara then arrived in Bijuvana. Dharmaketu was stalking a deer there. The beautiful deer was really Abhaya [Candi] herself who came before the hunter and worked her magic on him. Devi [Candi] would stop, linger, and then move with long fluid motions and the hunter followed behind her like a grasshopper. That powerful man drew his bowstring back to his ear and let an arrow fly. As the arrow raced towards its mark, Devi rose into the sky. Nilambara saw this happen in the blink of an eye and his worries about flowers left the young boy as he thought.
May our hearts be immersed at the feet of Abhaya; Sri Kavikankana’s song is sweet music.


[59]
By now dejected, Nilambara sits at the foot of a tree drowning in tears. “My heart feels as if it has been pierced with a sharp object! Life as a hunter is much better; why did I become the son of Indra? This hunter lives well. When thirsty he drinks water and he eats well in a timely fashion. My stomach burns from hunger for as long as my father the king does not do the Vis'vanatha [Siva] puja. This hunter is handsome. He is a forest dweller like Rama and I see that the deer is like Marica. The hunter’s abdomen is thinner than that of a lion and his hair is tied with a vine. He is fresh like Pancavana [god of love and spring, Kamadeva]. I have done nothing of note; my birth as a god is fruitless and I never went in search of knowledge. I never learned how to wield a bow; how will I protect myself if the gods and asuras have a war? All I ever do is wander about at dawn with a basket in hand as if I am a gardener or florist. Thorns have pierced my feet and branches hit me repeatedly in the chest. What horrible luck I have!”
By now Nilambara was extremely upset, and he mistakenly picked a wood apple with a thorn left on it. Thinking of Abhaya’s feet, Sri Kavikankana sings while the charioteer drives forcefully.

[60]
The time for puja was coming and the boy was worried. He frantically picked flowers in the middle of the forest. He picked whatever he could find and didn’t even spare the buds. Candi spread her magic over the flowers; there were many ants left inside the flame of the forest blossoms. Knowing that he was late, Nilambara hurried back home. When Indra saw that his son was delayed he thought: “The boy is lost in play. He is so wicked that Siva will certainly curse him.” The incense, lamps and food offerings were prepared slowly and Nilambara arrived just as the puja was getting underway. Indra placed a handful of flowers on the head of Hara [Siva]. A thorn pierced him and he became perturbed, but didn’t show it. Those nasty ants got into Siva’s hair, bit and greatly upset him. The ants’ poison burned like fire and Hara became distressed. He was miserable.“Listen to me, Indra” he said. “You are the ruler of the heavenly sphere. Why do you worship one who is a beggar from birth? You are worshiping me under false pretenses and your phony devotion is making a mockery of me. You wear sheer silk garments and a jeweled necklace around your throat while I have a bone necklace and wear a tiger skin. The goddess of fortune never leaves you and as a result, you have unlimited wealth. You are laughing at me, boy, when you see I have nothing.” Siva’s knit brow is cruel, his expression ferocious. Fire and sparks shoot from his eyes. Indra humbly placed his palms together and said: “It is not my fault! Nilambara picked the flowers!”
Siva then inquired of Nilambara; Nilambara rid himself of fear and spoke the truth. The boy truthfully told Siva what he had seen in the forest and Siva remembered what Candika had said. [Siva said:] “You left my service and followed your own desires. Go down to earth immediately and become a hunter!”
When such words came to Mahesa’s lips it was like a mountain had broken up and fallen on the young boy’s head. When Purahara [Siva] spoke those cruel words, Nilambara took hold of his feet and spoke. May our hearts be immersed at the feet of Abhaya; Sri Kavikankana’s song is sweet music.

[61]
Taking hold of Hara’s [Siva’s] feet, the boy humbly said: “Forgive my offence, you who are full of mercy. My transgression is very small and you have given me a curse to take birth in a family of hunters, which is out of proportion to my offense. You ignore my humble entreaty and drink virulent poison [in other words, you overlook the good I have done and only see the bad]. You have saved the three worlds. You are the abode of all good qualities, but you have gone against your servant; it is my terrible misfortune. Whoever serves you will never have a downfall whether they’re gods, nagas or humans. I do not see anywhere in creation where the moon rains down poison and sandalwood emanates fire. I chose to serve the enemy desire and the results are the opposite of what I wanted. Tied by the ropes of fate, I was filled with the desire for personal gain. Oh Hari, the most important thing has been destroyed. I Nilambara offer my body at your feet. Do with me whatever you desire. Be kind to me, greatest of the gods, so I do not go to either hell or heaven and your feet stay in my heart.” Seeing Nilambara’s despair, Siva hung his head from shame. That god with five faces Pancanana [Siva] gave an order: “Perform devotion to Candi; she will personally come to your home and release you from this curse.” As soon as Siva had spoken he appeared as a fever and entered Nilambara. Nilambara’s friends gathered around him and after donning tulasi beads around his neck, he lay down in the waters of the Ganga.
Serving you day and night, the poet Mukunda wrote this with the desire to create a new mangala poem. Manifest this poet’s wish and be kind to Sivarama, Citralekha, Yasoda, and Mahesa.

[62]
Nilambara made his bed in the Mandakini’s waters and Purandara [Indra] finished his puja. He sang praises to Siva after circling around, bowing down and saying prayers to him repeatedly: “There is no other destination besides your feet. You rid my ministers, friends and family of their sorrows. You are truth and reality; besides you I serve no other. Great Master, please forgive the faults of a young boy. Nilambara has the mind of a baby; do not be angry with him. Absence of devotion to you only brings destruction. The son of Brahma, Daksha, is proof of this. You drank the Kalakuta poison and are victorious over death. Whoever worships Sankara [Siva] has no fear. Whoever has devotion to your feet has conquered the three worlds. What can cause their downfall? As long as you are pleased with someone they’ll not have the flaws of old age, death, disease, sorrow, and poverty. O Master, please hear me and give the pana to Pravara for picking flowers.”
On Indra’s request, Hara [Siva] gave his permission. Pravara cupped his hands and took the pana from him. May my heart be immersed at Hara’s lotus-like feet. I will now sing the nacadi story of Chaya.

[63]
Her husband was immersed in the Ganga; Indra’s daughter-in-law Chayavati heard the news from others. Surrounded on all sides by her friends, her face expressing grief, she thought of Hari [Vishnu] the lord of fate. She let down her hair and let it hang loose. She removed all of her ornaments and repeatedly waved a mango branch. There was pandemonium in the city of the gods and everyone was crying. Saci’s heart was pierced with the missile of anguish.
Chaya lamented: “My husband has died in the prime of his life.”
She took her husband into her lap and sat down in the Ganges and beat her chest with both fists. Falling at her husband’s feet, Chaya spoke in a mournful voice: “Lord of my life, hear me. Things have changed for the worse in an instant. You have left your own wife and have taken away the respect due to me as a married woman. When you were picking flowers for worship fate became indifferent. You gave up your life because of Hara’s curse. This Chaya is unlucky; Sankara [Siva] left mercy behind and I am sunk in the worst kind of pain. Life in this body does not last forever; only death is certain. Everyone knows this. Death occurring in youth breaks my heart and my life breath will not be consoled.”
That lord of the suras Indra poured many containers of ghee in the fire pit on the banks of the Ganga. Lighting a lamp on two sides of the river, that chaste woman gave up her life on her husband’s funeral pyre. After taking her leave of Siva and bringing along those two lives with her, Candi left for the hunter’s abode.

[End of Book One—Deva Khanda]

[64]
[Book Two — Akhetika Khanda (Story of the Hunter Kalaketu)]

After consulting with her friend at dawn, Devi [Candi] became an old brahmana woman during the fast-breaking ceremony on the twelfth lunar day. She arrived at Dharmaketu’s house for the purpose of begging. Nidaya [Dharmaketu’s wife] gave her a place to sit and water to drink. Bhagavati [Candi] blessed her: “I am here to beg for something to break my fast. Please give me something to keep me alive. As a result you will have a son. You have had five daughters who are all admirable to all their husbands. The matchmaker goes from place to place.”
At this point seeing the potential for religious merit, Nidaya pursues the basis for her happiness: “Make my desire bear fruit. If we get a son to carry on our family line from your blessing then I promise to give you a servant.” Candi in the form of an old woman says: “I speak the truth. I know about medicines for giving birth to boys. I will give you many vials of it and it will not interfere with the love and affection between you and your husband. Take that and you will get a son. I am not lying; go take a bath while I search for the medicine. You are going to have a son!”
Because of her keen desire for a son, Nidaya quickly bathed and sat waiting with her face upturned. Right then Nilambara took the form of a fly and entered. Devi administered the medicine in Nidaya’s nostril. Nidaya fell at Devi’s feet and gave her rice, dried bean cakes, and eighty cowries. At Devi’s command, Chaya entered the womb of Hira at the time of conception.
Sri Raghunatha is the name of that king in the land of the brahmanas who is an abode of limitless good qualities. That member of his assembly writing attractive verse is Mukunda, foremost of poets.

[65]
On that day Dharmaketu was feeling amorous and according to fate, Nidaya became pregnant that very day. In the first month they may or may not have known. In the second there was gossip about it. In the third month Nidaya slept on the ground. In the fourth month she ate dirt. When five months passed Nidaya had no appetite for rice. In the sixth month of pregnancy she craved sour rice water. In the seventh month Dharmaketu gave her rasavasa, All of their friends and relatives gave Nidaya whatever she craved for auspiciousness’ sake. In the eighth month Nidaya’s belly increased in size, and she could neither move about nor look down to see her feet. At month nine the hunter gave Nidaya whatever she wanted. Nidaya told her husband that she was depressed.
Writing sweet verse in an ekapadi meter, Mukunda sang a Sri Kavikankana song.

[66]
“Lord of my life, why is this pregnancy so difficult? I have no appetite for rice, vegetables and water. My stomach feels hunger pangs, but I cannot get food past my mouth. Seeing my womb so heavy makes me scared and I have had no desire to eat or drink for about ten days. If I could only get some roasted fish and jama berry juice prepared in the way I prefer, then I would eat a few bites! How I long for some puffed rice free of unhusked kernels in buffalo curds with jujube and karanja sauce. If I could only have some sweet buttermilk and ripe calita soup and dried mango my life would return. The limit of my craving extends to bitter himca greens, palata leaves and gima greens. Cook me some mashed boala fish. Use lots of firewood and get a hot flame going, then get some astringent oil roiling hot. Put palata greens in that. I’d also like some pui greens, young shoots, thupi kacu [a root], and small phulabadi [little balls of dried vetch]; add some hot pepper too. I will fill my stomach with rice porridge colored with turmeric, and I would get my strength back if I could only have a ripe palm fruit. Add some finely ground salt to roast mongoose and monitor lizard. Oh, and pick up some large duck eggs while you are at it. Fry up some balikada fish and get me some large shrimp. Roast a rabbit on a spit too. I am always nauseous and my health is getting worse by the day. I vomit up liquid every day. Cook some white radish with broad beans and neem leaves. Add some small figs from the banyan tree to that as well.” Because of Nidaya’s cravings, Dharmaketu went home and gathered up all the ingredients. The hunter cooked everything by himself, and so satisfied Nidaya.
Thus wrote Sri Kavikankana.

[67]
[Nidaya’s Lament]
“My mother is not here; to whom can I tell my problems? My paternal and
maternal aunts, sister, and maternal uncle’s wife are not here either. My relatives and relatives who tolerate the heavy weight of this home are not here anymore. Fate has dealt me a bad hand.”
Ten months have past and the son of Indra is suffering from the fruits of his past actions. The infant is moving around in the womb and Nidaya is feeling her pain increasing by the second. She falls to the earth. Her friend gives her a shoulder to lean on and takes her into the house. Someone else rubs her limbs with oil and water. Another dear friend gives her some puffed rice to eat. Nidaya speaks out to the lord: “Oh lord of my life’s breath. I am falling; grab me by the hair. The roots of my hair are feeling pulled upon and my life is leaving me. What should I do? Tell me! My belly has become heavy; if I sit down I cannot get up and if I lie down I cannot roll over on my side. I cannot look down and it feels like needles are piercing my belly. I have no wish to live; I am dying! My chest and back feel as if I have been shot with an arrow. Jaya, I have hundreds of fears; only your mercy will save me. My life is at an end. Listen to me and bring a midwife who knows how to assist in childbirth. Find some expert in the town; make some medicine and save Nidaya’s life!” When the hunter heard Nidaya’s words his heart was seriously pained. He left
for the town of Kalinga. In order to relieve her servant’s pain, Candi appeared before the hunter. What can I say of the hunter’s luck other than he met up with Candi on the way? Dharmaketu fell at her feet. “Thakurani,be merciful; you know all about medicines,so save Nidaya’s life.”
Candi asked about Nidaya’s labor pains, and then she made believe that she was chanting incantations over some water. Nidaya drank the water and the boy fell to the earth only because of her merits. Their son cried and the couple became enamored of him. Both husband and wife were satisfied. For the benefit of their son, Dharmaketu bathed and gave the brahmanas ten deer.
Serving you day and night, the poet Mukunda wrote this with the desire to compose a new mangala. Appear before this poet and protect Sivarama, Citralekha, Yasoda, and Mahesa.

[68]
A son was born and Dharmaketu was ecstatic. Narayani flew into the sky in an airplane. Rice chaff was burned in the birthing room, and ululation resounded when the baby’s umbilical cord was cut. The goddess Shashti who protects infants was called down and a cow’s skull was placed on the right side of the doorway. Dharmaketu worshiped Shashti and asked for a boon. The mother ate healing foods on the third day. On the sixth day the shathyara ritual was performed in the lying-in room for the benefit of the infant. On the eighth day the ata-kodaiya ceremony was observed and on the ninth day the nartta ceremony was observed.
The hunter’s son changed in appearance every day. In a month Shashti puja and
the ekarttisa ceremony was performed. Somai Ojha performed the worship and made a
blood offering of a ghoraru deer on the right and a flop-eared deer on the left. The baby
boy fell asleep on the bedding while laughing and cooing. That hunter’s boy sometimes
laughed and sometimes cried. Two months passed with no problems, and then that son of
the Kirata turned over on his own. Four and five months passed going on six when his
annaprasana ceremony was held using a goat and sheep. An astrologer came and gave
him the name Kalaketu. They gave the astrologer a gift to ensure the baby’s long life.
Seven and eight months passed, then nine when two teeth rivaling pearls appeared. At
ten months he crawled on his hands and knees and they had to run after him from house
to house. Eleven months went by and then he was a year old. He moved freely from one
person’s house to the next and never was afraid. Two and three years went by and he got
together with other children. Kalaketu would grab bears and sarabha deer
and play with them. When he was five years old his ears were pierced in the Abhayamangala song of Sri Kavikankana.

[69]

Kalaketu gets bigger by the day. He roams around with the gait of a mad elephant as if he is the new god of love and is the reason for the happiness of everyone’s eyes. His nose, mouth, eyes and ears are as if made of star jasmine flowers. His two arms are as strong as iron, his behavior, beauty and good qualities are increasing. They increase in the same way a baby elephant gets large. His hair is more beautiful than a black yak’s tail. His forehead is beautiful and he wears a necklace of fishnet weights. On his wrists are iron chains and he wears tiger claws on his chest. He paints himself with red dust; his waist has three folds. His chest is like a massive door, his face like a blue lotus, his eyes stretch all the way to his ears. His gait rivals that of the king of beasts, his waist is thin like that of a lion as well, and his teeth are like pearls. His two eyes are like the lobelia fruit; he plays the game where he hits a target on a court with a wooden ball and his ears are decorated with crystal earrings. He wears his lower garment like a wrestler and ties his hair with the rope of a hunting net. He is the leader among the other children. The
neighborhood boys with whom he plays are afraid for their lives. Whomever he locks arms with gets thrown to the ground, so everyone stands next to him in fear. He roams about with the other children chasing and catching rabbits. When he goes a long way off, he chases dogs. Kalu [Kalaketu] kills birds with a slingshot and ties bundles of vines together. He then comes home with a heavy load on his shoulder. The astrologer came to the house on an auspicious day and put a hunting bow in the hand of the hunter’s son. The boy fastened a target with a dot on it and learned how to throw a spear. A leather cap adorns his head. Whenever he chooses to go to the forest with his father, he runs ahead faster than the wind. He chases and catches deer; what need has he of a bow and arrow? The hunter now thinks about his son’s marriage. Once by chance, father and son took a load to the market with Nidaya. Hira went over to Nidaya with meat for sale — Phullara was sitting nearby. Hira said to Nidaya: “What happened to that baby boy on your lap?”
Nidaya then replied: “Hey, live long my friend, and may you have a long life. Wish us luck that there will be a wedding soon. The intentions of the gods are magnanimous.”
The two became closer friends. Hira thought to herself: “Phullara has served Hara and she has the boon that her beauty will rival that of Kama.”
Ojha came before Dharmaketu with a bowl of flowers and durva grass in hand and a bag hanging from his shoulder. Dharmaketu gave an old water pot and gift of cloth, and then bowed his head. Somani Ojha then gave his blessing. With a leaf and ink in hand, he sat with his pen. “Whatever you tell me to say or write...”
I have no idea which trick Ambika uses to create her own tasteful song of praises through Mukunda’s mouth.
